Hello friends
In this video let us analyse the time and space
complexity of this selection sort algorithm
In the previous videos we have learned what is selection
sort and how to implement it
So selections are algorithm is generic
For all the input cases that is whatever the input
sequence maybe it will follow the same procedure
So the time complexity will be same for both best
and worst case so let us analyse the time complexity
First let us assume the array
size is five for the outer loop i equal
to zero
The inner loop will be executed for J equal to
one j equal to two j cool to three and
J equal to four that is from I plus one
to size minus one
So in first iteration of outer loop the inner loop
statement will be executed four times
Next when i equal to one the inner loop will be
executed from J equal to two to j equal to
four
That is 23 and four
So in the second iteration of outer for loop the
innerloop statement will be executed three times
Next when I equal to 2 the inner loop will be
executed for J equal to three and J equal to
four
That is two times Next when i equal to three the
inner will be executed
Only one time for J equal to four
So in Fourth Iteration we have only the inner loop
statement executed for one time Next when i equal to four
the condition will fail and the outer for loop will stop
its execution
So when size equal to five the total time taken
is t(x) equal to one plus two plus three
plus four which is size minus one
So in general when size equal to n t(x)
will be equal to one plus two plus three
Plus etc plus n minus one
And what is the sum of natural numbers from one
to n It is n into n plus one by
two
Here we have one plus two plus three up to
n minus one
So the last number is n minus one so replaced
n as n minus one in this equation and we
will get n minus one into n minus one plus
one divided by two and this minus one plus one
will be cancelled
So this equation will become t(x) equal to n
minus one into n divided by two that is n
square minus n by two
So we got the time required now how to get
the time complexity here
Just find the highest exponential and it is n square
here
So the time complexity of selection sort is order of n
square
And as we said first the selection sort algorithm will
behave the same for all kind of inputs
So here best worst and the average case time complexity
will be the same order of n square
Now let us do the space complexity analysis
The space complexity is the total amount of space a
particular algorithm takes to produce the output
So here array arr takes n units of
memory and the size variable will take one unit and
we have the variables i and j
Each will take one unit of memory so the total
memory space required is n plus three
And here the degree is one
So the space complexity will be order of n as now
let's discuss about the Auxillary space complexity
But before that what is auxillary space complexity
say the auxillary space is the extra space or
the temporary space used by an algorithm here the array arr
and size are the given inputs the extra memory used by
selection sort algorithm is I and J
One unit of memories needed by i and one unit of
memory needed by J
So total space is equal to two units
That is a constant
So the auxillary space complexity is order of one
And if it's sorting algorithm sort all the elements without
using extra memory or sort all the elements with
auxillary space complexity as order one
We can call that sorting algorithm as an in place
sorting algorithm so selection sort algorithm isn't in place sorting
algorithm .